---
title: Rebasing Pull Requests
description: Bring your pull requests up-to-date with their base branch automatically.
---

import { Image } from "astro:assets";
import rebaseScreenshot from "../../images/commands/rebase/example.png"

Rebasing is a method to integrate changes from one branch into another. It's
essentially like "replaying" changes from your branch onto another branch. This
is helpful when you want to ensure your changes are built upon the most recent
commits of the branch you're targeting.

Rebasing a pull request in GitHub allows you to update the entire commit
history of a branch onto its base branch, while the base branch received new
commits.

Mergify allows to rebase pull requests in two different ways:

- Either by using the [`rebase` command](/commands/rebase) which rebases the
  pull request immediately;

- Either by using an automation rule that automatically triggers a rebase
  when a pull request meets conditions.

## Rebasing a PR from GitHub

To instantly rebase a pull request without leaving GitHub, use the Mergify
rebase command by typing:

```text
@mergifyio rebase
```

<Image src={rebaseScreenshot} alt="Sending command @mergifyio rebase in the pull request conversation on GitHub." />

This command triggers a `git rebase` operation and force-push the rebased
branch.

import RebaseAdvantage from '../commands/_rebase_advantages.mdx';

<RebaseAdvantage />

## Automatically Rebasing PRs

You might be tempted to rebase pull requests automatically when they are behind
their base branch, such as `main` or `master`. The [`rebase`
action](/workflow/actions/rebase) is a great candidate to help in such a case.

You can write an automation rule that does exactly this for you:

```yaml
pull_request_rules:
  - name: continuously rebase pull requests when it's labeled with `rebase`
    conditions:
      - label=rebase
    actions:
      rebase:
```

Note that this rebases the pull request as long as it has the label.

If you wanted to rebase only once, you would also need to remove the label once
the rebase is done:

```yaml
pull_request_rules:
  - name: rebase pull requests once when it's labeled with `rebase`
    conditions:
      - label=rebase
    actions:
      rebase: {}
      label:
        remove:
          - rebase
```

### Rebasing Outdated Pull Requests

As rebasing a PR is likely to re-trigger your CI, rebasing your PR continuously
could be time consuming for your CI system. Rather than doing it on every merge
done in the base branch, you can rebase only when the PR is behind a number of
commits. For example:

```yaml
pull_request_rules:
  - name: rebase pull request when it's more than 10 commits behind main
    conditions:
      - base=main
      - "#commits-behind>=10"
    actions:
      rebase:
```

With this rule, as soon as the pull request is more than 10 commits behind the
`main` branch, Mergify automatically rebases the pull request which therefore
retriggers the CI. This is useful to make sure that you don't merge pull
request that are too much out-of-date.

:::caution
  If your goal is to only merge pull requests that are rebased and retested
  before being merged, you are actually looking for a [merge
  queue](/merge-queue). A merge queue makes sure each pull request is up to
  date and retested before being merged, while avoiding to update all pull
  requests at once.
:::

### Rebasing Pull Requests Once a Week

As stated above, rebasing too often your pull requests might not be great for
your CI resource usage. Therefore, you could also use a strategy where rebase
would only be done during a certain time frame, once a day.

```yaml
pull_request_rules:
  - name: rebase pull requests in the morning
    conditions:
      - base=main
      - "schedule=Mon-Fri 08:00-09:00[US/Pacific]"
    actions:
      rebase:
```

With this rule, any pull request that is out-of-date between 8am and 9am PST
during the week will be rebased.
