---
title: Merge Queue Freeze
description: Learn how to freeze your merge queues during incidents or planned events.
---

import { Image } from "astro:assets"
import freezeButtonScreenshot from "../../images/merge-queue/freeze/freeze-button.png"
import unfreezeButtonScreenshot from "../../images/merge-queue/freeze/unfreeze-button.png"

In the life cycle of software development and deployment, there can be times
when it is necessary to halt the merging of pull requests. Perhaps there's an
ongoing incident in the production environment, and it is crucial to control
any changes being merged until the issue is resolved. For scenarios like these,
Mergify provides a feature to **freeze** merge queues.

Freezing a merge queue means suspending the merging of pull requests, while
still allowing other operations such as queuing of pull requests and scheduling
checks in the queue. This ensures that your development workflow continues
seamlessly, while preventing any possibly disruptive merges.

## Managing Incidents with Merge Queues

Incidents are inevitable in any production system. However, managing these
incidents effectively is key to minimizing their impact. Here's how merge queue
freezing can be an invaluable tool during such incidents.

Imagine a scenario where there's a critical incident in your production
environment, and your team is working to resolve it. During this time, it might
be best not to introduce any new changes that could potentially aggravate the
issue or make it more difficult to identify the root cause.

In such cases, freezing your merge queues can be extremely helpful. By halting
the merging of pull requests, you ensure that your production environment
remains stable and changes-free, allowing your team to focus entirely on
resolving the incident.

Once the incident is resolved, you can simply unfreeze your queues, and merging
resumes from where it was left off, ensuring a smooth transition back to normal
operation.

## Freezing and Unfreezing Queues

### How to Freeze a Merge Queue

Freezing a merge queue in Mergify is a straightforward operation. To freeze a
queue, you need to navigate to the queue page from [Mergify
dashboard](https://dashboard.mergify.com) in your repository and look for the
option labeled "Freeze Queue". Clicking on this option will effectively pause
all merges for that specific queue.

<Image src={freezeButtonScreenshot} alt="Mergify queue freeze button" />

Please note that while the queue is frozen, pull requests can still be added to
the queue, and checks can still be scheduled and updated. The only operation
that is halted is the final merge operation.

### How to Unfreeze a Merge Queue

Unfreezing a merge queue is as simple as freezing it. In the queue settings,
click on the "Unfreeze Queue" option from [Mergify
dashboard](https://dashboard.mergify.com) to resume the merge operations. As
soon as a queue is unfrozen, the merge operations continue from where they left
off, assuming all checks and conditions are still met.

<Image src={unfreezeButtonScreenshot} alt="Mergify queue unfreeze button" />

## Understanding the Cascading Effect

The cascade effect is a useful feature when you want to freeze a queue and all
the queues beneath it. By choosing to freeze with "Cascading Effect", you halt
merges for a particular queue and any queue with a lower priority. This is
particularly useful in situations where you may want to continue merging
critical hotfixes (usually kept in the highest priority queue) while halting
other less critical merges.

To use the cascade effect, select the "Cascading Effect" option.

:::caution

  You cannot unfreeze a lower priority queue individually if it has been frozen
  as part of a cascade. The higher priority queue must be unfrozen first.

:::

## Operations During a Freeze

When a merge queue is frozen, it might appear that all operations are halted.
However, a freeze in Mergify primarily stops the merging of pull requests.
Here's what continues to happen in a frozen queue:

- **Pull Request Queueing**: Even in a frozen state, pull requests can still be
  added to the queue. This allows developers to continue their work and submit
  pull requests as usual, without having to worry about the state of the merge
  queue.

- **Check Scheduling and Updating**: While a queue is frozen, Mergify continues
  to schedule and update checks for the pull requests in the queue. This
  ensures that all pull requests are up-to-date and validated against the
  latest state of the base branch.

- **Review and Approval Process**: The review and approval process for pull
  requests in the queue isn't affected by a freeze. Reviews can be carried out
  as usual, and approvals (or changes requested) will still affect the pull
  request's position and status in the queue.

In essence, all operations except the final merging process continue to
function during a freeze. This enables teams to continue their workflows
largely undisturbed during an incident, ready to resume merging as soon as the
queue is unfrozen.

## Benefits of freezing the queue during incidents

Freezing your merge queues during an incident offers several benefits:

- **Stability**: By preventing new changes from being merged, you maintain a
  stable, changes-free environment that's easier to diagnose and troubleshoot.

- **Focus**: Your team can focus on resolving the incident, without having to
  worry about handling or reviewing new changes.

- **Continuity**: Developers can continue to queue their pull requests as
  usual, ensuring that development work can continue uninterrupted.

- **Control**: You have finer control over when and where to introduce changes,
  especially useful if you want to merge some high-priority fixes before
  unfreezing the queue.

In essence, the ability to freeze merge queues adds an extra layer of control
and flexibility to your incident management process.

## Troubleshooting and Common Issues

Despite best intentions, issues can arise while working with frozen merge
queues. This section aims to address some of these common concerns and offer
potential solutions:

1. **Unable to unfreeze lower priority queue**: Remember, if a high-priority
   queue is frozen with cascading enabled, all lower priority queues
   automatically get frozen due to the cascade effect. If you try to unfreeze a
   lower priority queue while a higher one is still frozen, it will not work.
   To unfreeze the lower priority queue, you first need to unfreeze the higher
   priority queue.

2. **Merge not resuming after unfreezing**: If you notice that the merges are
   not resuming after you've unfrozen a queue, check to ensure that no other
   higher priority queue is still frozen.

## Best Practices

Here are some guidelines to follow when working with freeze and unfreeze
commands in Mergify:

1. **Plan your freeze periods carefully**: Use the freeze feature wisely and
   only when needed. Unnecessary or prolonged freezing of queues can delay
   merges and slow down the development process.

2. **Communicate effectively**: If a queue freeze is expected to last for a
   longer duration or is due to an issue that affects multiple teams,
   communicate this early and update all concerned parties.

3. **Use the cascade effect effectively**: Understand when to leverage the
   cascade effect for freezing multiple queues with a single command. It's
   especially handy during emergencies or critical incidents where you need to
   stop all merges quickly.

4. **Regularly review the status of your queues**: Regularly checking your
   queue status, especially after freezing and unfreezing actions, can help
   ensure that your queues are functioning as expected.

5. **Use priority wisely**: Consider the implications of freezing high-priority
   queues, and how that will impact lower priority ones due to the cascade
   effect. In some situations, it might make sense to freeze a lower priority
   queue instead to avoid unnecessary disruptions. See [multiple
   queues](multi).

6. Use descriptive names for queues: This helps in easily identifying and
   managing the queues, especially in situations when you have to freeze or
   unfreeze them.
