---
title: Partitions
description: Optimize your merge queue for monorepos.
---

import OptionsTable from '../../../components/Tables/OptionsTable';

In Mergify, partition rules are a powerful feature designed to optimize the
handling of monorepos. Each partition runs in parallel, encompassing all the
queues defined in the queue rules. Partitions function independently from one
another, leading to more efficient and effective management of pull requests
(PRs) across your repository.

## How Partitions Work

Each partition acts like a separated repository. When a PR is queued in a
partition, any changes to the base branch in that partition don't interrupt the
processes in other partitions. Consequently, multiple partitions can
simultaneously manage different PRs, thereby ensuring smooth operations in a
monorepo.

A single PR can be queued in multiple partitions. In this scenario, Mergify
waits until the PR gets validated in each partition before merging it.
Therefore, although partitions operate independently, they can coordinate to
guarantee PR validation.

However, if a PR queued in several partitions fails in one partition, it is
deemed unmergeable. To be merged, a PR needs to meet the requirements of all
the partitions it is queued in.

{/* FIXME: schema! */}

## Setting Up Partition Rules

To assign a PR to a specific partition, use partition rules in the Mergify
configuration file. These rules can use different conditions, such as the
modification of certain files in the PR. For instance, a PR modifying any file
in the `projectA/` folder will be added to the `projectA` partition. Similarly,
a PR that modifies files in both `projectA/` and `projectB/` folders will be
added to both respective partitions.

If a PR does not match any existing partition rules, it will be added to all
partitions. You can then use queue rules to determine the specific queue within
the partition(s) where the PR should be added.

```yaml
partition_rules:
  - name: projectA
    conditions:
      - files~=^projectA/

  - name: projectB
    conditions:
      - files~=^projectB/

queue_rules:
  - name: default
    queue_conditions:
      - or:
        - partition-name!=projectA
        - check-success=ciA
      - or:
        - partition-name!=projectB
        - check-success=ciB
```

{/* FIXME: screenshot! */}

## Partition Rules Options

<OptionsTable name="PartitionRule" />

## Using a Fallback Partition

While migrating to partition rules, you can use a `fallback_partition` to
handle PRs that don't yet have a designated partition. This fallback partition
catches every PR that doesn't match any existing partition. Thus, it ensures
that your project operates as usual while you're transitioning to partition
rules.

There can only be one `fallback_partition` in a configuration file, and it must
not have any conditions to catch all possible PRs.

```yaml
partition_rules:
  - name: fallback
    fallback_partition: true

  - name: projectA
    conditions:
      - files~=^projectA/

  - name: projectB
    conditions:
      - files~=^projectB/

queue_rules:
  - name: default
    queue_conditions:
      - or:
        - partition-name!=projectA
        - check-success=ciA
      - or:
        - partition-name!=projectB
        - check-success=ciB
```

During this migration phase, if you manually merge a PR, Mergify will evaluate
it against the current partition rules. If the PR matches an existing
partition, that partition will be reset; otherwise, only the fallback partition
will be reset.

With a clear understanding of partition rules and how to use them, you can
efficiently manage your monorepo in Mergify, making your development workflow
more effective and agile.
