---
title: Troubleshooting your Merge Queue
description: Solutions for troubleshooting common issues with Mergify's merge queue to ensure smooth and efficient pull request processing.
---

Navigating the complexities of Mergify's merge queue can sometimes lead to
challenges. This guide offers concise, effective solutions for the most common
issues, helping you maintain a smooth and efficient pull request process.

Whether it's a delay, an unexpected behavior, or a processing hiccup, we've got
you covered with practical tips to keep your workflow running seamlessly.

### Problem: Continuous Integration Pipeline Isn't Triggered 

If your continuous integration pipeline isn't triggered when temporary pull
requests are created, check your CI system configuration. Make sure it is set
up to run on all pull requests, not just those targeting specific branches.

Branches created by Mergify are prefixed with `mergify/merge-queue/` by default
and can be change with the [`queue_branch_prefix`
settings](/configuration/file-format#queue-rules).

### Problem: Mergify Creates Temporary Pull Requests, But They Aren't Merged

Check the `merge_conditions` in the `queue_rules` from your Mergify
configuration. If these conditions aren't met, Mergify won't be able to merge
the temporary pull requests.

### Problem: Merge Process is Slow Despite Speculative Checks

This could be due to various reasons. Your `speculative_checks` number might be
too low, causing fewer PRs to be tested together. Alternatively, your
continuous integration might be the bottleneck. Check the capacity of your CI
system; you might need to scale it up to handle the load from speculative
checks.

Remember, the primary goal of speculative checks is to reduce the overall time
to merge all PRs. It does not necessarily decrease the time to merge a single
PR.

You can check the [performance](performance) page for more insight on merge
queue performances.

For further issues, don't hesitate to contact the <a
href="mailto:support@mergify.com">Mergify support team</a> will be
glad to assist you.
