---
title: Using Multiple Queues
description: Learn how to implement multiple merge queues and route your pull requests.
---

In larger projects with a high volume of pull requests, managing merges can
become a complex task. This is where Mergify's multiple queues feature can be a
game-changer. It enables you to have finer control over the merge process by
categorizing and prioritizing pull requests based on their relevance, urgency,
or any other criteria you define.

Multiple queues allow you to organize your pull requests into separate lanes,
each with its own rules and priorities. This is particularly useful when you
want to expedite critical fixes or prioritize feature deployments without
disrupting the regular flow of code integration. By using multiple queues, you
can ensure that important pull requests get the attention they deserve, while
others continue to be processed in their own time. In this documentation, we'll
guide you through the process of understanding, setting up, and efficiently
managing multiple queues.

`video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RlV43lXINwc`

## Understanding Multiple Queues

Mergify's multiple queues system is a powerful tool for managing a large number
of pull requests. In essence, it allows you to create different queues, each
with its unique configuration, set of rules and priorities.

The processing of queues is done in the order they are defined. The first queue
listed in your configuration is considered the highest priority queue. This
means that all pull requests in this queue will be processed before moving onto
the next queue. Mergify starts processing from the highest priority queue and
then moves down to lower priority queues.

{/* FIXME: add graphviz schema */}

Inside each queue, pull requests are processed in the order they arrive,
following a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) model. However, if you define [priority
rules](priority), you can influence this order. Each pull request can have its
own priority within the queue based on these rules. This adds another layer of
control, allowing you to specify the order of pull requests within each queue.

In short, queues control the order in which groups of pull requests are
processed, while [priority rules](priority) (if defined) can adjust the order
of pull requests within each queue. Furthermore, each queue can have its own
configuration (e.g., [speculative checks](speculative-checks),
[batches](batches)), giving you even more control over its behavior.

This dual-layer system gives you fine-grained control over your pull request
processing pipeline.

## Configuring Multiple Queues

Multiple queues in Mergify can be configured using the `queue_rules`
configuration in your Mergify YAML file. Each queue rule should be identified
by a unique name and can have different configurations. Here is a step-by-step
guide on how to set up multiple queues and some configuration options that you
can use.

1. **Define Your Queues**: Start by identifying the different queues you need.
   This could be based on your project's requirements, the type of pull
   requests, or the teams working on them. Write your
   [`queue_conditions`](lifecycle#adding-a-pull-request-to-the-merge-queue)
   accordingly.

```yaml
queue_rules:
  - name: urgent
    # This can be queued before CI finishes its first run if the PR has the urgent label
    queue_conditions:
      - label = urgent
    # We still want the CI to pass to merge the PR
    merge_conditions:
      - check-success = myci
  - name: standard
    # CI is needed for queueing and merging the PR
    queue_conditions:
      - check-success = myci
```

   In this example, pull requests with the `urgent` label will be queued into
   the `urgent` queue before the first CI even finished, making sure the PR is
   updated and scheduled as soon as possible.

2. **Configure Each Queue**: For each queue, you can specify different
   configurations like `batch_size` or `speculative_checks`.

```yaml
queue_rules:
  - name: urgent
    ...
    batch_size: 2
    speculative_checks: 2
  - name: standard
    ...
    batch_size: 5
    speculative_checks: 3
```

## Queue Interruption and Priority

One of the essential features of Mergify's multiple queues is the dynamic
handling of queue priorities. By default, when a pull request enters a queue
that has a higher precedence over the one currently being processed, the
processing of the current queue gets interrupted, and the higher precedence
queue takes over. This ensures that your most critical pull requests are
processed as soon as possible, regardless of what else is happening.

However, there might be cases where you don't want this interruption to occur â€”
perhaps you don't want to disturb an ongoing CI process, or you have specific
scheduling needs. For this, Mergify offers the
`disallow_checks_interruption_from_queues` configuration option.

By listing queues in `disallow_checks_interruption_from_queues` that should not
interrupt the queue, you can prevent a lower priority queue from being
interrupted by a newly arrived pull request in a higher priority queue. This
gives you even more control over how your pull requests are processed and
merged, allowing you to fine-tune the process to match your team's workflow and
needs.

```yaml
queue_rules:
  - name: urgent
    ...
  - name: default
    ...
  - name: lowprio
    ...
    disallow_checks_interruption_from_queues:
      - default
```

In the example above, if Mergify has launched a job to process PRs from the
`lowprio` queue, it will not interrupt this job as soon as a PR enter the
`default` queue. Mergify waits for the current job to be finished, and then
move on to the `default` queue.
